---
title: Soft Pretzel Recipe
date: 2024-11-04T13:31:30-07:00
summary: A simple recipe for making soft pretzels. (vegan but not gluten-free.)
tags:
- recipes
---

Someone on Mastodon asked me for a pretzel recipe as we discussed coping foods for the beginning of tomorrow's election result chaos. 

I typically use a stand mixer for this recipe but you should be able to do it in a large food processor with a dough blade as well. If you do use a food processor I'd recommend starting with the dry ingredients (yeast, flour, salt) in your food processor bowl, mixing the wet ingredients (water & sweetener) in a separate bowl, then drizzling the wet mixture into the food processor base while it is running.

This recipe will make about 12 pretzels of the same size you would see if you bought those little packs of pre-made frozen soft pretzels. (Those are a bit smaller than your uh... wetzel's pretzels or auntie anne's varieties but a very enjoyable size all the same.)

## Ingredients

- 1 packet instant yeast
- 1/4 cup agave or honey
- 1 teaspoon salt
- 3 cups bread flour
- 1 cup warm water
- 3 tablespoons baking soda
- 2 tablespoons coarse salt

## Directions

1. Mix together the yeast, warm water, and agave/honey in the bowl of your stand mixer. Let the yeast proof for a few minutes until foamy. 
2. Mix the flour and salt into your yeast mixture, then using your mixer's dough hook, knead the dough for 5 to 7 minutes until a smooth but firm ball of dough forms.
3. Let the dough rise in a covered oiled bowl for 1 hour (possibly longer depending on the air moisture conditions in your kitchen). I typically clean out the same stand mixer bowl, lightly coat with canola oil, and use that for the rising but any large bowl will do.
4. Deflate the dough, cover, and let rise again for another 30 minutes. While this is happening I start warming up my oven to 450F degrees and prepare a baking sheet with aluminum foil that has been sprayed with some form of vegetable oil.
5. Divide the dough into 12 equal pieces. Roll each piece into a 20" long rope, roughly 1/2" thick. Then shape the rope into the traditional pretzel shape of your choice. At this time I prepare a large skillet with 5 to 6 cups of water and the baking soda, bringing the mixture to a boil.
6. Using some kind of slotted spoon or wire skimmer, place about 3 to 4 shaped pretzels into the boiling water mixture for 30 seconds at a time. Flip these over and let sit for another 30 seconds. Remove and place on the prepared baking sheet.
7. Sprinkle the tops of the pretzels with the coarse salt and bake for 12 to 15 minutes, ideally turning the baking sheet in the over half-way through the bake time. Once pretzels are a deep golden brown, remove and let cool on a wire rack.
